# user data manifesto

This manifesto aims at defining users’ fundamental rights to their own data in
the Internet age. People ought to be free and should not have to pay allegiance
to service providers. 

<ol start="0"><li>“User data” means any data uploaded by a user and/or
generated from a user, while using a service on the Internet. </li></ol>

Thus, users should have:

1. **Control** over user data access

    Data explicitly and willingly uploaded by a user should be under the
    ultimate control of the user. Users should be able to decide whom to grant
    direct access to their data and with which permissions and licenses such
    access should be granted.

    Data received, generated, and/or collected from users’ activity while using
    the service (e.g. metadata or social graph data) should be made accessible
    to them and put under their control as well. If this control can’t be
    given, then this type of data should be anonymous or not stored for
    periods longer than necessary.

2. **Knowledge** of how the data is stored

    When the data is uploaded to a specific service provider, users should be
    informed about where that specific service provider stores the data, how
    long, in which jurisdiction the specific service provider operates, and
    which laws apply.

    Users should be free to choose to store their own data on devices (e.g.
    servers) in their vicinity and under their direct control. This way, users
    do not have to rely on centralised services.

3. **Freedom** to choose a platform

    Users should always be able to extract their data from the service at any
    time without experiencing any vendor lock-in.

    Open standards for formats and protocols are necessary to guarantee this.
    Programs under a Free Software license should be available for such formats
    and protocols.




If users have these rights, they are in control of their data rather than being
subjugated by service providers. 

Many services that deal with user data at the moment are gratis, but that does
not mean they are free (as in freedom). Instead of paying with money, users are
paying with their allegiance to the service providers so that they can exploit
user data (e.g. by selling them, licensing them or building a profile for
advertisers). 

Surrendering privacy in this way may seem to many people a trivial thing and a
small price to pay for the sake of convenience that these Internet services
bring. This has made this kind of exchange to become common.

Service providers have thus been unwittingly compelled to turn their valuable
Internet services into massive and centralised surveillance systems. It is of
grave importance that people understand/realize this, since it forms a serious
threat to the freedom of humanity.

When users control access to the data they upload (Right #1), it means that
data intended to be privately shared should not be accessible to the service
provider, nor shared with governments.  Users should be the only ones to have
ultimate control over it and to grant access to it. Thus, a service should not
force you to disclose private data (including private correspondence) with
them. 

That means the right to use cryptography[^snake-oil] should never be denied. On
the contrary, cryptography should be enabled by default and be put under the
users’ control with Free Software that is easy to use.  

[^snake-oil]: We mean effective cryptography. If the service provider enables
  cryptography but controls the keys or encrypts the data with your password,
  it’s probably [snake oil][Snake Oil].

[Snake Oil]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_oil_%28cryptography%29

Some services allow users to submit data with the intention to make it publicly
available for all. Even in these cases, some amount of user data is kept
private (e.g. metadata or social graph data). The user should also have control
over this data, because metadata and logging information can be used for
disproportionate surveillance.  Service providers must commit to keeping these
to a minimum, and only for the purpose of operating the service.

When users make data available to others, whether to a restrictive group of
people or to large groups, they should be able to decide under which
permissions they grant access to this data. However, this right is not absolute
and should not extend over others’ rights to use and exploit the data once it
has been made available to them.  What’s more, it does not mean that users
should have the right to impose unfair restrictions to other people. 

<!--**Protection** from legal schemes-->
When user data is governed by other laws regulating their flow (e.g.
copyright, personal data protection), users should be protected from granting
broad licenses catching rights that are not necessary for the operations on
data. <!--TODO: make it more concrete and simple-->

Ultimately, to ensure that user data is under the users’ control, the best
technical designs include peer-to-peer or distributed systems, and unhosted
applications. Legally, that means terms of service should respect users’
rights and give them the possibility to exercise the rights defined in this manifesto.

When users use centralised services that uploads data to specific storage
providers instead of relying on peer-to-peer systems, it is important to know
where the providers might store data because they could be compelled by
governments to turn over data they have in their possession (Right #3).

Users should not rely on centralised services. Peer-to-peer systems and
unhosted applications are a means to that end.  In the long term, all users
should have their own server.  Unfortunately, this is made very difficult by
some Internet access providers that restrict their customers unfairly. Also,
being your own service provider often means having to administer systems which
require expertise and time that most people currently don’t have or are not
willing to invest.

Users should not get stuck into a specific technical solution.  This is why
they should always be able to leave a platform and settle elsewhere (Right #4).
It means users should be able to have their data in an open format, and to
exchange information with an open protocol. [Open standards] are standards
that are free of copyright and patent constraints. Obviously, without the
source code of the programs used to deal with user data, this is impractical.
This is why programs should be distributed under a Free Software license like
the GNU AGPL-3[^agpl].

[^agpl]: The GNU AGPL-3 safeguards this right by making it a legal obligation
to provide access to the modified program run by the service provider.
([§ 13. Remote Network Interaction][agplv3])

[^whydirect]: Once the user has granted direct access to somebody else over the
  data, it is no longer in their sole power to decide who should get access to
  that data (unless other conditions outside the scope of this manifesto
  apply).



<!--Cryptography (e.g. a [PKI]) is necessary to enable this control.-->

[PKI]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PKI

[Open standards]: http://fsfe.org/activities/os/def.html 

[agplv3]: http://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl.html

-----




TODO:

 - add about right to cryptography; Add a "aside" did you nkow that? Ask Jan
   about his idea
 - in lasst point, paragraph about open standard and free software: is this
   implementation? is this necessary or should it be in the details?
