[[!meta title="Related projects and statements"]]
[[!meta language="en"]]
[[!tag projects]]

Here's a list of related projects or statements and an extract from their
introduction or preamble.

  - [Franklin Street Statement on Freedom and Network Services][franklin]

    > The current generation of network services or Software as a Service can
    > provide advantages over traditional, locally installed software in ease of
    > deployment, collaboration, and data aggregation. Many users have begun to
    > rely on such services in preference to software provisioned by themselves or
    > their organizations. This move toward centralization has powerful effects on
    > software freedom and user autonomy.

  - [Free/Open Services Definition][FreeOpenServicesDefinition]

    > Software as a Service (SaaS) has become extremely popular in the last few
    > years, demonstrating a number of benefits to users and developers,
    > including:
    >
    > […]
    > 
    > Unfortunately, SaaS has historically been antithetical to many of the
    > goals advanced by free software and open source. Among the restrictions
    > typical of many SaaS systems: 

  - [Open Software Service Definition][opendefinition]

    > An online service, also known under the title of Software as a Service
    > (SaaS), is a service provided by a software application running online and
    > making its facilities available to users over the Internet via an interface
    > (be that HTML presented by a web-browser such as Firefox, via a web-API or by
    > any other means).
    > 
    > With an online-service, in contrast to a traditional software application,
    > users no longer need to ‘possess’ (own or license) the software to use it.
    > Instead they can simply interact via a standard client (such as web-browser)
    > and pay, where they do pay, for use of the ‘service’ rather than for ‘owning’
    > (or licensing) the application itself.

[opendefinition]: http://opendefinition.org/software-service/
[franklin]: http://autonomo.us/2008/07/14/franklin-street-statement/
[FreeOpenServicesDefinition]: https://wiki.gnome.org/Attic/FreeOpenServicesDefinition
